Good afternoon,
ladies and gentlemen
I hope you enjoyed
the previous discussion
about the education
Now we would like to
switch the language
So the upcoming session is in English
And we will also switch the topic
Meanwhile I would like to recommend you
to check the Youtube channel
where you can find the new videos
The new video contribution
from MEP Marcel Kolaja
And from two great analysts
Eliška Pírková and Pavel Havliček
But right now I am glad
that I have the opportunity
to make a live interview
with George Tilesch
Senior Global Innovation
and Artificial Intelligence expert
who is acting as a conduit
and trusted advisor
between the US and the European ecosystems
He is focusing on AI strategies,
ethics, impacts and many more
He is also co-author of a great book
dedicated to artificial intelligence
The book 'BetweenBrains:
Taking Back our AI Future'
I have to admit that I haven't read the book yet
but of course I did a small research
and what is my take that
that
according to you George,
our age is about deciding
on a future of the role
of artificial intelligence
Citing your own words
“It is a period of in-betweenness”
Could you tell us more
about this in-betweenness?
Between what we are?
Please George,
the floor is yours
Thank you very much Aneta
I’m very much honoured and privileged
to be with you today
And
And to sail under the Jolly Roger
flag with you all
With this crew
In-betweenness is basically derived
from the title of my book
that you have just showcased so well
I'm thinking that this is the age when
we are between the different models
First of all,
because of the core of my activities
are about artificial intelligence
This is the in-betweenness age
between human and machine intelligence
And don't get me wrong about that
I'm not gonna, you know,
play Silicon valley profit here
Who are talking about
the innovate ability
of machine intelligence taking over
What I'm trying to call the attention
of the audience to is that
it can be a very extended period of time
When we have to learn how to interact
and how to engage
with machine intelligence
and how they will transform us
and how we can define
machine intelligence or
artificial intelligence
to serve the purpose of our civilisation
So we are also between different models
and when you said that
that this is, you know,
the time of model setting
or vision setting
I would say this should be the time
of vision setting
and I think we are a little late
because there is a
there is a big discrepancy
between our readiness
to societies and economies
and the prevalence of
machine intelligence systems,
artificial intelligence systems
that already deployed
for years now
You know, in governments and in
commercial services that we are using
So it surrounds us already
even without most of the people and
most of the citizen knowing about it
Another aspect of the in betweenness is,
you know,
this age of experimentation
and these deployed
the reality of these deployed systems
So many organisations in the world
including European governments
and companies
are experimenting with these systems
and learning the rules of it
and, you know,
they have many failed projects
they have a few good projects
in that regard
But in other parts of the world,
Especially in China and the US,
these systems are,
you know, much more deeply ingrained
in the fabric of society
And finally I think that the word of
warning here is that
The last aspect that I wanted to
grasp is that we're
potentially between a welfare society
especially here in Europe
And if we are not taking back our AI future
If we are not defining the purpose well
and our new social economy models,
it can easily lead to a
Some kind of a dystopian future
And that's a big danger because
there are rules,
there are laws that are ingrained
in the technology
that have not been seen before
And we have to get used to it
So
Again
I think that the last effort,
the last in-betweenness
that I wanted to grasp
is in our thinking,
in our minds
We have been in this age called digital
transformation for decades now
and we have navigated that age with
a certain incremental approach
and I don't think our brains
are wired in a way that are
getting used to the exponential
and I think AI is very much
exponential
It develops in leaps and bounds
It gives enormous power to
the ones who own it
and who manage it
So that kind of leap,
mental leap from incremental
to exponential
I think is very very important
and should be the defining
part of our age
Thank you very much George
You said that our brains are,
let's say,
not ready yet for the future developments
But I have to say that for many people
We also discussed it before
in the previous panels
That, for example,
machine intelligence or
artificial intelligence
for many people, it is only another
technical term, let's say
It's only another buzzword maybe
So according to you,
how the AI so much differs
in this sense?
Like
What's so revolutionary on artificial intelligence?
Well, I can approach this
from multiple angles
So let's start with
So this is a trade,
you're absolutely right in that
this is a trade
that I'm encountering it everyday
from citizens,
from politicians,
even from some corporate leaders
And there are two fallacies
regarding that
I would say number one fallacy is that
this is just another wave,
this is like, you know,
big data awards
or cloud computing awards before
and this is all part of this
incremental digital
transformation process
that I've talking to you about
I think we cannot be
more wrong than that
Secondly, of course,
because it’s rooted in technology
most people who don't feel technical
or actually already feel lost
in this digital world
And many citizens are like that
You know
there is still a relatively low level
of digital literacy
But we are still
You know everybody uses Facebook
Everybody uses
these AI powered products
to gather information,
To make consumer choices,
To choose entertainment
and so on and so forth
without understanding what it is
So taking a step back
and that may sound a little bit
cynical from me
but its not meant to be such
But
I think AI,
artificial intelligence is mostly a
marketing tool right now
Actually the accurate use of it
would be something like
artificial intelligence technologies
because its a wide,
it's a broad set of technologies
including, you know,
computer vision and
natural language processing,
decision support systems
So there are so many technologies
under this umbrella of AI
And the reason why is that
It was probably about 5 years ago
when companies started
betting big on these
So they had a pressure
on commercializing whatever
it’s coming out of their labs
and they needed
very handy expression
so they basically revived it
from obscurity
But the truth is,
The scientific truth is that
First of all,
not all AI researchers agree that
whatever we have out there right now
can be scientifically labeled AI
so there are a lot of people saying that
machine learning
which is the most prevalent AI technology right now
is not exactly AI,
it's not there yet
It's just sophisticated data work
So I'm not gonna go into
this scientific direction
because what I care about
and probably what most of
your audience is about
is the impact of these technologies
not the technological
background of it
but what do they do with us as citizens
And, you know, you guys as policy makers
you are probably approaching it
from this angle
What creates further confusion is
when you are trying to
delineate the pragmatic
and the aspirational aspects of
defining artificial intelligence
The truth of the matter is that
this is a process that has been going in
for about 60 years now
through periods that are called
AI winters and AI summers
And for you just to understand this terminology
AI winter
I called it also mildly humorously
or mildly cynically
are the ages when we are having
overinflated expectations
for what AI can provide
and when the technology actually
doesn't live up to these expectations
Then, you know,
funding is disappearing
and all the scientists or the
researchers are going back to the lab
and try to come up with something
that is more viable
So what I'm trying to say is that
I think five years ago,
about five years ago
everything changed
The whole equation changed
The paradigm changed
Corporations and governments
Venture capitals
and everybody started
pouring money
and throwing money against that
Against all kinds of artificial
intelligence development
Oh but
there's another thing
that I wanted to say
So 60 years ago,
the earliest definitions of AI
Have already introduced the term
'human equivalent'
So the original intent of
you know, very very
great scientist in the US
who started researching that
was to create human equivalent
artificial intelligence and
machine intelligence
The systems that are out there right now
and most of the research that is
actually happening right now
is really far from that kind of
human equivalency
but is already commercialised
And that's I think
the most important part of it
is that
it doesn't live up to the
aspirational standards
of creating artificial
general intelligence
so you know, the super intelligence
of The Terminator movies
But it's something that is robots
It's something that is absolutely
going beyond technology
It has its own laws
It prefers, you know,
concentration of resources
It
And if you're reading my book
there are like 5 or 6
major power laws
that are specific to AI
that have been laid out
Which should define the strategies
and the way of thinking how, you know,
governments and corporations or
leaders in general should think about
devising their own strategies
Because there are many many elements
that are very specific to AI
that have not been seen before
or have not been seen before
in such concentration of power
And they should definitely heed the call
One last thing that I wanted to say
and that's very Europe specific
You mentioned that I live in California
I sometimes have the honour
and the privilege of being listened to
by the European institutions
Especially in the future
work aspects of AI
and one thing that I'm encountering
in Europe sometimes is this kind of
This is just another wave
Or
you know, we know what we are doing,
we don't have to listen
to the Americans or to the Chinese,
we absolutely grasp the essence of AI
Just
You know
give us more funding, do your commission
and we will get it done
So this is also a very dangerous
way of thinking
I think it's a very introverted
but you know we can talk about more
more about the geopolitical aspects
or who's winning
in that regard
Yeah
That's also my follow up question
because for me as a journalist
who is covering European issues
I can see that many countries in Europe,
but also in the whole world
are declaring that they want to be the leaders
in the artificial intelligence
Even the Czech Republic wants to be the
leaders in the artificial intelligence
So do you think that given this race
between countries
can the artificial intelligence become
source of kind of geopolitical or
international tensions?
It already is
I would say,
it very much is
Where to approach it from?
So
Let's start with China
China is not the most important
or the most powerful player
on that scene
but it has the biggest momentum,
I would say
And it has the biggest
concentration of resources
So it has the advantages of
initiative in AI
Since 2015- 2016,
China went all in on AI
Basically it became the core strategy
of the Chinese government
both in its international
expansion efforts
and devising an AI powered
operating system
for its society
let's call it that
And there are, you know,
parts of it that
you probably have heard about
as a journalist
like the social credits system
and so on and so forth
So I think we have to fully
understand how
how China is betting on AI and AI only
or mostly
So China has a huge
concentration of resources
and zero boundaries
between state and industry
I think that's my most
important statement
So Chinese private tech companies
are listening to central orders
and they have been given the tasks
of delivering on certain aspects
or certain sets of AI technologies
So there is this concentration
of investment
that I think it's very worth it
and also there is something
that we would call
Or that we can call
data monopolies
and data colonization
and the data monopolies is
something that
is absolutely driven by
both the US and China right now
The data colonisation aspects
I think is more prevalent
in the case of China
which means
you probably heard that,
you know
Most of Africa is already being
kind of dominated
by Chinese international expansion
and of course the whole
South East Asian region
So that is very much central
in the strategy
And the US has the
I would say,
the most potential
or the most historical advantages
but
I'm working with a number of,
you know,
a number of committees
inside the US government
or with the US government
and what I see is that there were
a few years that have been
slower than necessary
I wouldn't call it
wasted completely
but definitely
slower than necessary
So the US was not taking the angle
of what other countries have been
taking of, you know, putting together
AI national strategies
until quite late
So I would say 50-60 countries
have already published
their national strategies
before the US
took its first step
What happened in the US is probably
the China compete mentality
has taken over
so whatever hyper-speed that
I’m experiencing
inside the US federal government
for, I would say,
the last 6 months
is very much in this context of
competing with China
and catching up with
some of the momentum
that they are having
and building on the
traditional US advantages
And the reason why that happened is
that
for a long time
I think
And you need to understand
the US culturally for that
So for a long time,
the US government
especially the Trump administration,
thought
that as long as, you know,
the dominance
of the big tech companies in the US
who are one and the same with
the AI leaders of the world
is being insured in
the international scene
then there's not much to be done
other than, you know,
the usual spendings
on defence and intelligence
which is also very central
to American thinking
And that
that was, you know, what held them back
for quite a long time
Now they're very much catching up
I’m seeing a lot of momentum
and a lot of innovating thinking
that has not been seen before
I’m just giving you one example
I just heard that you had
an education panel before me
even if I don't speak Czech
I'm very sorry
But the type of thinking
that the EU has
Has not been,
on education and massive
education programs
that, you know, should be
publicly funded
It's not being part of the US DNA
for a long long long time
Actually it was like,
I think 5
0.05% of the GDP that has been spent
on public education programs
and that's,
you know,
Now I'm thinking of company turnaround
in the US government
and now they have realised and
they are actually doing a lot of
pioneering initiatives
on how to retrain
the government workforce
I'm talking tenths of millions people
to be AI compatible
and having AI compatible jobs
So this is very novel
and very very new
Now Europe
and of course this is where I'm getting
a little bit more cautious
because
I'm not living here anymore but
I'm keeping my eyes on that
So
The EU I think is putting the emphasis
on a value centric approach
in AI,
in, you know,
building trust worthy AI
and of course it does
what it usually does
the regulatory approach
which has certain advantages
and certain disadvantages
I believe that in the long run
it may be a long term positive
Of course it needs bets
I think that The EU currently
is betting on
for one reason or another
that the spread of AI technologies
will be slower
than how I expect it to be
and if they are right,
then their caution is well deserved
but I think in the long run the EU
can become something like a very
popular destination of
attracting talent from abroad
because it's focused on values and
just security and that kind of thing
Go ahead
Great
Thank you very much George
for this great insight
when it comes to artificial intelligence,
Governments and the whole
important and interesting topics
you mentioned
Our time is over now
Because in the next 2 minutes
the new session
The new panel discussion is beginning
The topic is the future of
European digital policy
and it's great that you will
also join this panel  as well
So thank you very much
and I'm looking forward to
the next discussion
that is starting in the next 2 minutes
So thank you very much
Thank you very much Aneta